Astro 5.13 blog post (#1746)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-5130.mdx

---
title: 'Astro 5.13'
description: 'Astro 5.13 ships stuff!'
homepageLink:
  title: 'Astro 5.13'
  subtitle: 'Available now!'
publishDate: '2025-08-14'
authors:
  - sarah
  - ema
coverImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-5130/blog-post-cover-astro-5130.webp'
socialImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-5130/og-astro-5130.webp'
lang: 'en'
related:
  - astro-5120
  - astro-5110
---

import Mention from '/src/components/Mention.astro';

**🍀 Lucky Astro 5.13 brings stuff, stuff, and more!**

The starting lineup includes:

- [**Static `import.meta.env`**](#static-importmetaenv)
- [**Chrome workspace support**](#chrome-workspace-support)
- [**Multiple sitemaps**](#multiple-sitemaps)

> - [**Hosted error pages**](#hosted-error-pages)

Author: ```suggestion
- [**Experimental hosted error pages with the Node.js adapter**](#experimental-hosted-error-pages)
```

However, Astro by default turns non public `import.meta.env` values into `process.env` calls during the build, if the environment variable name is present in `process.env`. It also converts your environment variables used through `import.meta.env` in some cases, and this can prevent access to some values such as the strings `"true"` (which is converted to a boolean value), and `"1"` (which is converted to a number).

The `experimental.staticImportMetaEnv` flag disables this behavior, ensuring that `import.meta.env` values are always inlined.

To enable this feature, add the experimental flag in your Astro config:

```diff
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
+  experimental: {
+    staticImportMetaEnv: true,
+  }
})
```

This experimental flag supersedes the `experimental.rawEnvValues` flag, that you need to remove in your Astro config:

```diff
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
   experimental: {
-    rawEnvValues: true,
+    staticImportMetaEnv: true,
   }
})
```

> ## Chrome workspace support

Author: ``````suggestion
## Experimental Chrome DevTools workspace support

Chrome workspace folders allow you to save changes made in DevTools back to your project code via a connected workspace folder. This allows you to apply edits such as CSS adjustments without ever leaving your browser tab!

Astro 5.13 brings a new experimental option for the Astro dev server to automatically configure a Chrome DevTools workspace for your project. Your project folder will appear as a workspace source, no manual configuration needed, ready for you to connect. Then, any changes that you make in the "Sources" panel are automatically saved to your local source files.

To enable this feature, add the experimental flag `chromeDevtoolsWorkspace` to your Astro config:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-6}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    chromeDevtoolsWorkspace: true,
  },
});
```

See the [experimental Chrome DevTools workspace feature documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/chrome-devtools-workspace/) for more information.
``````

## Multiple sitemaps

The package `@astrojs/sitemap` has new option `customSitemaps` to include extra sitemaps in the `sitemap-index.xml` file generated by Astro.

This is useful for multi-framework setups on the same domain as your Astro site (`example.com`), such as a blog at `example.com/blog` whose sitemap is generated by another framework.

The following example shows configuring your Astro site to include sitemaps for an externally-generated blog and help center along with the generated sitemap entries in `sitemap-index.xml`:

Example:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import sitemap from '@astrojs/sitemap';

export default defineConfig({
  site: 'https://example.com',
  integrations: [
    sitemap({
      customSitemaps: [
       'https://example.com/blog/sitemap.xml',
       'https://example.com/helpcenter/sitemap.xml'
      ]
    })
  ]
});
```

Learn more in the [`@astrojs/sitemap` configuration documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/sitemap/#configuration).

> ## Hosted error pages
> 
> The adapter `@astrojs/node` now supports for specifying a host to load prerendered error pages
> 
> By default, if a user defines a custom error page that is prerendered, Astro will load it from the same host as the one that the request is made to. This change allows users to specify a different host for loading prerendered error pages. This can be useful in scenarios such as where the server is running behind a reverse proxy or when prerendered pages are hosted on a different domain.
> 
> To use this feature, set the `experimentalErrorPageHost` adapter option in your Astro configuration to the desired host URL. For example, if your server is running on localhost and served via a proxy, you can ensure the prerendered error pages are fetched via the localhost URL:

Author: ```suggestion
## Experimental hosted error pages

The latest release of the Node.js adapter ships with experimental support for loading prerendered custom error pages from any specified host.

Astro needs to be able to load your 404 page in order to return it in a response. By default, Astro will load prerendered custom error pages from the same host as the one that the request is made to. For example, if a request is made to `https://example.com/nonexistent-page`, Astro will attempt to load the prerendered error page from `https://example.com/404.html`.

`@astrojs/node@9.4.0` now handles situations where your custom error page must be loaded from a different host, such as when the server is running behind a reverse proxy or in a container that may not have access to the external host URL. You can also use this option when it is more efficient to load the prerendered error page from localhost rather than via the public internet.

To use this feature, set the `experimentalErrorPageHost` adapter option in your Astro configuration to the desired host URL. For example, if your server is running on localhost and served via a proxy, you can ensure the prerendered error pages are fetched via the localhost URL:
```
light polish to make it more blog posty

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import node from '@astrojs/node';
export default defineConfig({
  adapter: node({
    // If your server is running on localhost and served via a proxy,
    // set the host like this to ensure prerendered error pages are fetched via the localhost URL
    experimentalErrorPageHost: 'http://localhost:4321'
  })
});
```

For more information on enabling and using this experimental feature, see the [`@astrojs/node` adapter docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/#experimentalerrorpagehost).

## Enum support in Astro DB table

> The package `@astrojs/db` adds support for enum support for text columns in Astro DB tables.

Author: ```suggestion
We are sure you'll be `({ enum: ['happy', 'thrilled', 'over the moon'] })` about this update to Astro DB!

The latest release brings long-awaited enum support for text columns in Astro DB tables. This behavior better aligns with user expectations and with the underlying Drizzle implementation.

Note that this is used exclusively to generate types, and no runtime validation will be performed. Removing, adding, and changing values should be handled in your own project code.
```

@Adammatthiesen would you care to review this section of the blog post and make sure it's accurate/representative of the release?

Reviewer: Looks good to me @sarah11918

```ts
import { column, defineTable } from 'astro:db';

// Table definition
const UserTable = defineTable({
	columns: {
		id: column.number({ primaryKey: true }),
		name: column.text(),
        rank: column.text({ enum: ['user', 'mod', 'admin'] }),
	},
});

// Resulting type definition
type UserTableInferInsert = {

>     id: string;

Author: ```suggestion
    id?: string;
```

    name: string;
    rank: "user" | "mod" | "admin";
}
```

## Local support for Cloudflare KV

> The adapter `@astrojs/cloudflare` refactors the internal solution that powers Astro Sessions.
> 
> The adapter now uses Cloudflare's local support for [Cloudflare KV](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/). This internal change is a drop-in replacement and does not require any change to your projectct code.
> 
> However, you can now connect to the remote [Cloudflare KV Namespace](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/concepts/kv-namespaces/) if desired and use production data during local development.

Author: ```suggestion
 The newest release of the Cloudflare adapter includes local support for [Cloudflare Workers KV](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/) when running `astro dev`. This internal refactoring is a drop-in replacement for powering Astro sessions and does not require any change to your existing project code.

However, you can now choose to connect to the remote [Cloudflare KV Namespace](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/concepts/kv-namespaces/) if desired and use production data during local development.
```

Reviewer 2: @sarah11918 Only question if we should add a link to `remote` or `production data`, to this Cloudflare doc page (https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/development-testing/#remote-bindings). I let you decide.

Astro 5.13 includes a new `experimental.staticImportMetaEnv` flag that updates the behavior of `import.meta.env` to align with [Vite's handling of environment variables](https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html#env-variables) and for better ease of use with Astro's current implementations and features. This flag supersedes the previous `rawEnvVariables` as a more complete solution for handling private meta environment variables. **This will become the default behavior in Astro 6.0**, and this early preview is introduced as an experimental feature. 

Currently, non-public `import.meta.env` environment variables are replaced by a reference to `process.env`. Additionally, Astro may also convert the value type of your environment variables used through `import.meta.env`, which can prevent access to some values such as the strings `"true"` (which is converted to a boolean value), and `"1"` (which is converted to a number).

> The `experimental.staticImportMetaEnv` flag simplifies Astro's default behavior, making it easier to understand and use. Astro will no longer replace any `import.meta.env` environment variables with a `process.env` call, nor will it coerce values. Instead, your private meta environment variables will always be inlined.

Author: @florian-lefebvre Please review the text of this whole section, but in particular I've added a line here that wasn't in any earlier documentation that I want to make sure is said accurately!

> Instead, your private meta environment variables will always be inlined.

I wanted to introduce the language we're using for the title of the feature guide by saying this in "plain language"  so I used those terms here!

Reviewer 3: The whole section LGTM!

You can learn more about using environment variables in Astro, including `astro:env`, in the [environment variables documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/environment-variables/).

## Experimental Chrome DevTools workspace support

Chrome workspace folders allow you to save changes made in DevTools back to your project code via a connected workspace folder. This allows you to apply edits such as CSS adjustments without ever leaving your browser tab!

Astro 5.13 brings a new experimental option for the Astro dev server to automatically configure a Chrome DevTools workspace for your project. Your project folder will appear as a workspace source, no manual configuration needed, ready for you to connect. Then, any changes that you make in the "Sources" panel are automatically saved to your local source files.

To enable this feature, add the experimental flag `chromeDevtoolsWorkspace` to your Astro config:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-6}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    chromeDevtoolsWorkspace: true,

>   },

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    chromeDevtoolsWorkspace: true
  }
```

>     chromeDevtoolsWorkspace: true,
>   },

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    chromeDevtoolsWorkspace: true
  }
```

export default defineConfig({
  adapter: node({
    // If your server is running on localhost and served via a proxy,
    // set the host like this to ensure prerendered error pages are fetched via the localhost URL
    experimentalErrorPageHost: 'http://localhost:4321'
  })
});
```

For more information on enabling and using this experimental feature, see the [`@astrojs/node` adapter docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/#experimentalerrorpagehost).

## Enum support in Astro DB table

We are sure you'll be `({ enum: ['happy', 'thrilled', 'over the moon'] })` about this update to Astro DB!

The latest release brings long-awaited enum support for text columns in Astro DB tables. This behavior better aligns with user expectations and with the underlying Drizzle implementation.

Note that this is used exclusively to generate types, and no runtime validation will be performed. Removing, adding, and changing values should be handled in your own project code.

```ts
import { column, defineTable } from 'astro:db';

// Table definition
const UserTable = defineTable({
	columns: {
		id: column.number({ primaryKey: true }),
		name: column.text(),

>         rank: column.text({ enum: ['user', 'mod', 'admin'] }),
> 	},

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        rank: column.text({ enum: ['user', 'mod', 'admin'] })
	}
```

export default defineConfig({
  adapter: node({
    // If your server is running on localhost and served via a proxy,
    // set the host like this to ensure prerendered error pages are fetched via the localhost URL
    experimentalErrorPageHost: 'http://localhost:4321'
  })
});
```

For more information on enabling and using this experimental feature, see the [`@astrojs/node` adapter docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/#experimentalerrorpagehost).

## Enum support in Astro DB tables

We are sure you'll be `({ enum: ['happy', 'thrilled', 'over the moon'] })` about this update to Astro DB!

The latest release brings long-awaited enum support for text columns in Astro DB tables. This behavior better aligns with user expectations and with the underlying Drizzle implementation.

Note that this is used exclusively to generate types, and no runtime validation will be performed. Removing, adding, and changing values should be handled in your own project code.

```ts
import { column, defineTable } from 'astro:db';

// Table definition
const UserTable = defineTable({
	columns: {
		id: column.number({ primaryKey: true }),
		name: column.text(),

>         rank: column.text({ enum: ['user', 'mod', 'admin'] })

Author: ```suggestion
		rank: column.text({ enum: ['user', 'mod', 'admin'] })
```

However, you can now choose to connect to the remote [Cloudflare KV Namespace](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/concepts/kv-namespaces/) if desired and use production data during local development.

## Bug fixes

As always, we've been working hard on fixing issues since the [5.12 release](/blog/astro-5120). See [the changelog](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md) for all the details.

## Community

The Astro core team is:

<Mention name="alex" />, <Mention name="ben" />, <Mention name="caleb" />,
<Mention name="chris" />, <Mention name="ema" />, <Mention name="erika" />,
<Mention name="florian" />, <Mention name="fred" />, <Mention name="fuzzy" />,
<Mention name="hideoo" />, <Mention name="luiz" />, <Mention name="matt" />,
<Mention name="matthew" />, <Mention name="nate" />, <Mention name="reuben" />,
<Mention name="sarah" />, and <Mention name="yan" />

Thanks to all the other contributors who helped make Astro 5.13 possible with code and docs additions and improvements, including:

> [Adam Matthiesen](https://github.com/Adammatthiesen), [Adrian Sieradzki](https://github.com/asieradzk), [Aidan McAlister](https://github.com/aidankmcalister), [Alexander Niebuhr](https://github.com/alexanderniebuhr), [Ariel K](https://github.com/anaxite), [Armand Philippot](https://github.com/ArmandPhilippot), [Azushii](https://github.com/Azushii-dev), [benosmac](https://github.com/benosmac), [Bjorn Lu](https://github.com/bluwy), [Brandon Ly](https://github.com/branberry), [Brian Birtles](https://github.com/birtles), [casungo](https://github.com/casungo), [chaegumi](https://github.com/chaegumi), [Coding in Public](https://github.com/coding-in-public), [ColoredCarrot](https://github.com/ColoredCarrot), [David Boyne](https://github.com/boyney123), [DNEK](https://github.com/dnek), [Felix Schneider](https://github.com/trueberryless), [Feng Yu](https://github.com/abcfy2), [Gourav Khunger](https://github.com/gouravkhunger), [Jacob Jenkins](https://github.com/jdtjenkins), [Jacob Pretorius](https://github.com/jacobpretorius), [Jat](https://github.com/jat001), [Jonas Geiler](https://github.com/jonasgeiler), [Junseong Park](https://github.com/jsparkdev), [Kayla Akyüz](https://github.com/kaylaa0), [Kian](https://github.com/KianNH), [knj](https://github.com/jp-knj), [Kyosuke Nakamura](https://github.com/kyosuke), [LEF](https://github.com/lef237), [Louis Escher](https://github.com/louisescher), [Luke Eades](https://github.com/LukeEades), [Martin Trapp](https://github.com/martrapp), [Mateusz Bocian](https://github.com/mrstork), [Matthew Justice](https://github.com/JusticeMatthew), [Michal Piechowiak](https://github.com/pieh), [Oliver Speir](https://github.com/OliverSpeir), [Paul Valladares](https://github.com/dreyfus92), [Pier Bover](https://github.com/PierBover), [pioupia](https://github.com/pioupia), [Rezix](https://github.com/RezixDev), [Sebastian Beltran](https://github.com/bjohansebas), [Shinya Fujino](https://github.com/morinokami), [Souleimane Konate](https://github.com/Grisoly), [Thomas Bonnet](https://github.com/thomasbnt), [Tiago Vilela](https://github.com/tiagovla), and [vrabe](https://github.com/vrabe)

Author: ```suggestion
[Adam Matthiesen](https://github.com/Adammatthiesen), [Adrian Sieradzki](https://github.com/asieradzk), [Aidan McAlister](https://github.com/aidankmcalister), [Ariel K](https://github.com/anaxite), [Armand Philippot](https://github.com/ArmandPhilippot), [Azushii](https://github.com/Azushii-dev), [benosmac](https://github.com/benosmac), [Bjorn Lu](https://github.com/bluwy), [Brandon Ly](https://github.com/branberry), [Brian Birtles](https://github.com/birtles), [casungo](https://github.com/casungo), [chaegumi](https://github.com/chaegumi), [Coding in Public](https://github.com/coding-in-public), [ColoredCarrot](https://github.com/ColoredCarrot), [David Boyne](https://github.com/boyney123), [DNEK](https://github.com/dnek), [Felix Schneider](https://github.com/trueberryless), [Feng Yu](https://github.com/abcfy2), [Gourav Khunger](https://github.com/gouravkhunger), [Jacob Jenkins](https://github.com/jdtjenkins), [Jacob Pretorius](https://github.com/jacobpretorius), [Jat](https://github.com/jat001), [Jonas Geiler](https://github.com/jonasgeiler), [Junseong Park](https://github.com/jsparkdev), [Kayla Akyüz](https://github.com/kaylaa0), [Kian](https://github.com/KianNH), [knj](https://github.com/jp-knj), [Kyosuke Nakamura](https://github.com/kyosuke), [LEF](https://github.com/lef237), [Louis Escher](https://github.com/louisescher), [Luke Eades](https://github.com/LukeEades), [Martin Trapp](https://github.com/martrapp), [Mateusz Bocian](https://github.com/mrstork), [Matthew Justice](https://github.com/JusticeMatthew), [Michal Piechowiak](https://github.com/pieh), [Oliver Speir](https://github.com/OliverSpeir), [Paul Valladares](https://github.com/dreyfus92), [Pier Bover](https://github.com/PierBover), [pioupia](https://github.com/pioupia), [Rezix](https://github.com/RezixDev), [Sebastian Beltran](https://github.com/bjohansebas), [Shinya Fujino](https://github.com/morinokami), [Souleimane Konate](https://github.com/Grisoly), [Thomas Bonnet](https://github.com/thomasbnt), [Tiago Vilela](https://github.com/tiagovla), and [vrabe](https://github.com/vrabe)
```

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental static `import.meta.env`

Adds an experimental flag `staticImportMetaEnv` to disable replacement of `import.meta.env` values with `process.env` calls and their coercion, and supersedes the `rawEnvValues` experimental flag

Astro allows you to configure a [type-safe schema for your environment variables](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/environment-variables/#type-safe-environment-variables), and converts variables imported via `astro:env` into the expected type.

However, Astro by default turns non-public `import.meta.env` values into `process.env` calls during the build, if the environment variable name is present in `process.env`. It also converts your environment variables used through `import.meta.env` in some cases, and this can prevent access to some values, such as the strings `"true"` (which is converted to a boolean value), and `"1"` (which is converted to a number).

The `experimental.staticImportMetaEnv` flag disables this behavior, ensuring that `import.meta.env` values are always inlined.

> To enable this feature, add the experimental flag in your Astro config:
> 
> ```diff
> import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";
> 
> export default defineConfig({
> +  experimental: {
> +    staticImportMetaEnv: true
> +  }
> });
> ```
> 
> This experimental flag supersedes the `experimental.rawEnvValues` flag, which you need to remove in your Astro config:
> 
> ```diff
> import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>    experimental: {
> -    rawEnvValues: true
> +    staticImportMetaEnv: true
>    }
> });
> ```

Author: ``````suggestion
To enable this feature, add the experimental flag in your Astro config and remove the `experimental.rawEnvValues` flag if it was enabled:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4,5,7} del={6}
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
   experimental: {
     rawEnvValues: true,
     staticImportMetaEnv: true,
   }
});
```
``````

To use this feature, set the `experimentalErrorPageHost` adapter option in your Astro configuration to the desired host URL. For example, if your server is running on localhost and served via a proxy, you can ensure the prerendered error pages are fetched via the localhost URL:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import node from '@astrojs/node';

export default defineConfig({
  adapter: node({
    // If your server is running on localhost and served via a proxy,
    // set the host like this to ensure prerendered error pages are fetched via the localhost URL
    experimentalErrorPageHost: 'http://localhost:4321'
  })
});
```

For more information on enabling and using this experimental feature, see the [`@astrojs/node` adapter docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/#experimentalerrorpagehost).

> ## Enum support in Astro DB table

Author: ```suggestion
## Enum support in Astro DB tables
```

The starting lineup includes:

- [**Feature 1**](#feature-1)
- [**Feature 2**](#feature-2)
- [**Feature 3**](#feature-3)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Feature 1
## Feature 2
## Feature 3

## Bug fixes

As always, we've been working hard on fixing issues since the [5.12 release](/blog/astro-5120). See [the changelog](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md) for all the details.

## Community

The Astro core team is:

<Mention name="alex" />, <Mention name="ben" />, <Mention name="caleb" />,
<Mention name="chris" />, <Mention name="ema" />, <Mention name="erika" />,
<Mention name="florian" />, <Mention name="fred" />, <Mention name="fuzzy" />,
<Mention name="hideoo" />, <Mention name="luiz" />, <Mention name="matt" />,
<Mention name="matthew" />, <Mention name="nate" />, <Mention name="reuben" />,
<Mention name="sarah" />, and <Mention name="yan" />

> Thanks to all the other contributors who helped make Astro 5.12 possible with code and docs additions and improvements, including:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Thanks to all the other contributors who helped make Astro 5.13 possible with code and docs additions and improvements, including:
```
